Add Best Practice: `map` versus `flatmap` when wiring properties (#36214)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/reference/best-practices/best_practices_laziness.adoc

Understanding when to use `map`, `flatMap`, and how to avoid creating "naked providers" is essential for reliable builds.

=== Explanation

Gradle's Provider API uses `map` and `flatMap` to transform and connect task properties.
However, certain patterns break the connection between tasks, causing builds to fail or produce incorrect results.

When wiring task outputs to inputs:

1. **Use `flatMap` to extract Provider properties** — this is correct and necessary for the Provider API
2. **Chain `map` to transform values** — don't create new providers with `provider {}`
3. **Use `map` to extract eager properties** — extract plain values like `File` or `String`, not Provider properties
4. **Never call `.get()` to read file content in callbacks** — the file doesn't exist yet at configuration time
5. **Use directly annotated output properties** — avoid deriving properties through `.map {}`

NOTE: For dependency tracking to work, task output properties must be properly annotated with `@OutputFile`, `@OutputDirectory`, or similar annotations.
Without these annotations, Gradle cannot track task dependencies.

> === Use `flatMap` to Extract Lazy Provider Properties and `map` to Transform Values

Reviewer: 🤔 "Lazy Provider Properties" is just 🤯 to me.  What exactly are these?

// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[best_practices_for_laziness]]
= Best Practices for Laziness

[[map_versus_flatmap]]
== Be Careful with `map` vs. `flatMap` when Wiring Properties

Using `flatMap` on a `TaskProvider` to extract an input property will sever the automatic task dependency chain, causing build failures or incorrect incremental results.

=== Explanation

The primary difference between `map` and `flatMap` in the <<lazy_configuration.adoc#lazy_configuration_faqs,Provider API>> is how they handle the producer information.
When you use `map`, Gradle treats the transformation as a continuation of the existing provider; the task dependency (the _producer_) remains attached.

In contrast, `flatMap` is designed to transform one provider into a completely different provider.
If you use `flatMap` to extract a property from a task (e.g., `task.flatMap { it.someProperty }`), Gradle often loses the connection to the original task that owns that property.
The code will look logically correct but fails at execution time because the producer task is never added to the task graph.

Key rules:

> - Don't ever call .`get()` inside a closure. Calling `.get()` realizes the value immediately, breaking lazy configuration and task dependency tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is usually a mistake to call .`get()` on a `Provider` inside a closure. Calling `.get()` realizes the value immediately, breaking lazy configuration and task dependency tracking.
```

> - Don't ever call .`get()` inside a closure. Calling `.get()` realizes the value immediately, breaking lazy configuration and task dependency tracking.

Reviewer 2: :+1: This is a good point, and a source of many issues people face.

In this example, using `flatMap` on the `TaskProvider` results in a new Provider that has _forgotten_ it was produced by `GeneratorTask`:

[source,kotlin]
----
val generator = tasks.register<GeneratorTask>("generate") {
    outputFile.set(layout.buildDirectory.file("out.txt"))
}

val consumer = tasks.register<ConsumerTask>("consume") {
    // FOOTGUN: flatMap here loses the dependency on the 'generator' task
    // Gradle will try to run 'consume' without running 'generate' first
    inputContent.set(generator.flatMap { it.outputFile.map { file -> file.asFile.readText() } })
}
----

==== Do This Instead

Chain the transformations directly off the property itself.
By mapping the `RegularFileProperty` directly, the producer information is carried through the `Provider`:

[source,kotlin]
----
val generator = tasks.register<GeneratorTask>("generate") {
    outputFile.set(layout.buildDirectory.file("out.txt"))
}

val consumer = tasks.register<ConsumerTask>("consume") {
    // CORRECT: Map the property directly.
    // The resulting Provider<String> still "knows" it comes from the 'generator' task.
    inputContent.set(generator.flatMap { it.outputFile }.map { it.asFile.readText() })
}

> ----

Reviewer: ❗ I think this is a very subtle footgun, and deserves a full running example.  This is a good start at it.
